# Reddit: Division and Discourse 

**Author:** Ava Tramonte

**Issue:** Surveillance and Society Submissions

**Date:** October 15th, 2025

---

Reddit, a social media platform often described as a space for open discussion and diverse communities, is also one that shapes online discourse and division. Reddit tracks user data and actively shapes user behavior and identity through interface design, platform governance, and profit-driven algorithms. The site propagates existing social biases and creates new social hierarchies while surveilling members for disciplinary control and nudging self-regulation. Using critical frameworks and drawing from personal observations, I will uncover the impact the platform has on its users, and highlight necessary reform, in order to protect their autonomy, right to privacy, and advocate for an equal digital experience among users.

## Introduction
Reddit is an online forum and social media site where users share content, post inquiries, and discuss across a network of communities, or subreddits. Each subreddit is home to a particular topic, and users are able to join, post, comment, and share pictures, videos, and links. Reddit has a simple interface design, with primarily text-based content. Users are able to create an account, customize suggested forums, express approval or disapproval of posts through upvotes and downvotes, and gain karma scores and awards. The platform has 8 universal rules of conduct or Reddit Rules, and each subreddit has rules of their own. These rules are enforced by moderators, auto moderators, and Reddit administration. Moderators are volunteers assigned to each subreddit that manage content and the behaviour of users. They are tasked with enforcing both subreddit-specific as well as site-wide rules. Automoderators enforce rules similarly, but through methods like keyword filters and post limits. Reddit administrators ensure rule-following as well, and intervene on specific issues when necessary. Reddit markets itself as “the heart of the internet” that fosters a family of diverse members, sharing the things they care about most[^1]. While Reddit may foster community as it claims, it is necessary to analyse its properties to reveal how it also reinforces division, tracks user data, and shapes behaviour.

## Cultural Biases and Impacts
Reddit enables and reinforces biases while silencing marginalized voices. Its design allows for the circulation and promotion of toxic technocultures with ineffective moderation, amplified through its algorithms. In August 2014, a large amount of stolen explicit photographs of celebrities from Apple’s iCloud Service were posted on 4chan, an online bulletin where anyone could post images and write comments. The links to these images circulated on a popular subreddit called r/thefappening, where Redditor’s would post vulgar, misogynistic, and sometimes violent comments about the celebrities. Since Reddit’s algorithms are primarily based on new and highly upvoted posts, many users, both new and old, were exposed to the content that contained links to the stolen images when viewing r/all. It took Reddit over a week to take the subreddit down, and its permanent ban was implemented only after a minor’s pictures were shared. These images circulated on smaller subreddits for months after. Reddit made an exuberant amount of profit off this incident, which provides an explanation for why it took so long to ban the subreddit in the first place [^2]. The culture and design of Reddit inherently permits misogynistic and other bigoted ideologies to take hold. After a quick search, it was easy to find a misogynistic post on Reddit. Even though the first ‘Reddit Rule’ states that, users must ‘Remember the Human – No hate or harassment.’ and the subreddit’s second custom rule states that it does not permit misogyny, this post, which has been online for 10 days with 37 comments, on a very popular subreddit, clearly violates both. This demonstrates the lack of reliability in subreddit’s moderators, auto moderators, admin, and their commitment to the promises they make.
Additionally, Reddit uses social credit programs to place hierarchy on its members, reproducing and potentially amplifying existing societal rankings [^3]. Reddit’s karma and rewards, displayed on each user’s profile, curate their digital character. If a user has more upvotes than downvotes, they will have a positive karma score, and the inverse would reflect a negative karma score. Users can also get paid by other members in the form of Reddit coins as a reward for high-quality content [^1]. Those with dominant opinions are rewarded, whereas those who deviate from the norm are considered to be untrusted sources.  This engineered inequality silences voices that do not conform, often those from marginalized groups like women, LGBTQ+ members, and people of colour [^3]. This is not only done through subreddit communities, but through the algorithms built into the site. The upvote feature on Reddit highlights certain posts on the r/all page, while also herding [^2] other users to interact and agree/disagree with popular opinions, no matter how harmful they are. Reddit has made inadequate attempts to rectify this, like giving subreddit moderators the option to opt-out from being included and changing the default set of subreddits that a Redditor is subscribed to. Even so, it is still up to the user to actively change if they want to see opposing material. In addition to Reddit’s designed echo chambers, when users are banned for breaking the rules, it is very easy to create new accounts and reoffend under different names [^2]. Reddit's administrators engage minimally with content issues because the platform is designed to aggregate rather than host material. Aside from self-posts and comment threads, most content comes from external sites like Imgur, YouTube, or Tumblr [^2]. As a result, admins avoid dealing directly with whether content is appropriate, since users are linking to what already exists online. Reddit’s administration will most likely stay stagnant on this issue, as since a large part of its membership are those contributing to the discriminatory culture of the site, alienating them would mean lower engagement and less monetary gain. 

## Reddit and Panopticonism 
Although Reddit prides itself on its authenticity and anonymity for users, its features promote a sense of panopticonism. Jeremy Bentham’s panopticon encapsulates the phenomenon of producing self-discipline in people through creating an assumption that they are always being observed. This perception makes people monitor their behaviour in order to fit into societal norms, and those who deviate are punished, corrected, or excluded [^4]. The activity of Reddit users is constantly monitored through moderators, admin, and other members. Users watch each other through public profile views, and are able to correct actions through reporting posts. Moderators are able to pin posts, remove posts, issue warnings, temporarily ban and mute users, hide comments, and add users to an approved list where they can bypass filters and restrictions [^1]. If users want to avoid being moderated or punished based on the rules defined by others, they must self censor and conform to the norm. In the case of shadowbans, moderators can make user comments invisible without their knowledge, thereby silencing them. In order to have a voice on an app like Reddit, one must think and act like the majority. 

## Advertising
Advertisements are embedded in Reddit on all of its pages. These ads are based on user data such as subreddit and post engagement, search history, Reddit cookies, duration of content interaction, device type, IP address, device location, and language settings. In addition, Reddit partners with companies that collect cookies to estimate user demographics like age and gender [^1]. The site then uses this data to curate ad content for monetary gain for Reddit and the companies it partners with. This mobilizes the concept of surveillance capitalism, where our behaviour is viewed as material for behavioural data so that companies can make predictions, personalize interfaces, and gain capital [^5]. Reddit has a vast collection of information on its users, yet we are unaware of how its algorithms are profiling us. This personalization evidently doesn’t solely exist in the form of ads, but also in suggestions and feeds. Users interact with certain material through clicks, upvotes/downvotes, comments, etc. and they are fed similar content that align with those interactions. This can further cause harm by creating echo chambers where users are only exposed to dominant viewpoints, or believe that their own opinions are the only ones to exist [^5].

## Reddit as a Data Source
It is important to consider other ways in which people can be affected when Reddit is used as a data source. Currently, Reddit is being used for research and surveillance purposes since the site is publicly available. Although users are aware that this platform is public, they may not fully understand the extent to which their posts and data are being used. With the rise in the use of machine learning models, the potential harm from this lack of informed consent can be exacerbated. Machine learning systems function in ways that humans cannot understand, drawing inferences from information that appears to be anonymized. Recent studies have shown that large language model-scraped Reddit data including posts, comment history, and subreddit participation can reveal sensitive personal views and behavioural patterns. Models can be trained to use these inferences to predict political leaning [^6]. Not only is this revelation an infringement on personal privacy, but it can make incorrect inferences about users, and corrupt democracy. This also means that artificial intelligence could potentially infer other sensitive information about an individual’s identity, like their sexual orientation. Even though technically not illegal, Reddit users are not made aware that their data is being collected by these models, or how it is analyzed and categorized. Reddit’s privacy policy states that they are not responsible for how one’s public information is used [^1], but with the rise of Big Data, new policies must be put in place to protect users. 

## Transparency Review
Although users agree to Reddit’s Privacy Policy and Terms of Service (ToS) when joining, its complexity and ambiguity displays transparency issues. When reflecting on past conversations, and reviewing studies, it is clear to me that most people do not read the Privacy Policies or ToS of a platform before joining. Policies are legalistic, usually at the reading level of college-educated adults, despite the platform age minimum being 13. Most people do not want to read long, confusing documents, and trust that if a service is widely used, then there mustn't be cause for concern [^7]. Even so, agreeing to terms is a prerequisite to using the site, and to not use it is often out of the question for most. Reddit creators, and all social media platforms, are aware of the alarming evidence that points towards most users not reading these documents but selecting ‘agree’ anyways. Instead of making these terms more digestible for users, Reddit embeds features that users can ‘opt out’ of, without much indication on how to do so. For example, in the fine print of the User Agreement, it states that members can opt out of Reddit using information from third-party partners to personalize their experience [^1]. Even if users read these documents closely, ambiguous statements—such as Reddit’s claim that it “will try to notify you beforehand, but that won’t always be possible”—highlight the platform’s unreliability [^1]. The Privacy Policy and Terms of Service can be changed at any time without users being properly informed, further indicating the site’s lack of commitment to transparency.

## Reddit as a Space for Community
Although there are several ways in which Reddit creates discourse and division, it is important to highlight how the platform serves as a space for community. Subreddits are a place where people are able to share their beliefs and viewpoints, and hopefully find others that share them as well. Socializing and community-building is a strong predictor of user motivation on Reddit, and it can enable users to fulfill a range of emotional, cognitive, and social needs—whether they’re seeking information, self-esteem, entertainment, or connection [^8]. Although these communities may be hard to find as a result of Reddit’s popularity algorithm, once discovered, they can play a pivotal role in one’s life. For marginalized groups like LGBTQ+ youth, Reddit offers space to explore identity, build resilience, and access social or health support that is not always available offline. These interactions help users rehearse self-expression, share stories, and build relationships [^9]. Users are able to anonymously discuss their struggles and successes, getting the support that many people from this marginalized group do not have elsewhere. For example, the subreddit r/trans is a safe space for transgender people to share their experiences. The comment thread contains affirming and encouraging words, helping the individual who was coming out feel less alone before they take an important step in their journey.

## Conclusion
In conclusion, through interface design and platform governance, Reddit shapes behavior and identity in ways that can offer spaces for both exclusion and connection. Reddit’s interface design, platform governance, and algorithmic decision-making actively promotes conformity, reinforces dominant ideologies, and monetizes user behavior through surveillance capitalism. New critical frameworks and policies must be implemented to address the need for greater transparency, accountability and ethical responsibility in all social media platforms, in order to serve and connect communities instead of control and divide them.

## References
[^1]: Reddit Inc. “Homepage.” Last modified March 6, 2025. [https://redditinc.com/.]
[^2]: Massanari, Adrienne. “#Gamergate and The Fappening: How Reddit’s Algorithm, Governance, and Culture Support Toxic Technocultures.” New Media & Society 19, no. 3 (2015): 329–346. [https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444815608807.]
[^3]: Benjamin, Ruha. Race after Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2019.
[^4]: Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Translated by Alan Sheridan. New York: Pantheon Books, 1975.
[^5]: Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power. New York: PublicAffairs, 2019. Accessed via Internet Archive. [https://archive.org/details/zuboff-shoshana.-the-age-of-surveillance-capitalism.-2019/page/n9/mode/1up.]
[^6]: Fiesler, Casey, Michael Zimmer, Nicholas Proferes, Sarah Gilbert, and Nathan Jones. “Remember the Human: A Systematic Review of Ethical Considerations in Reddit Research.” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 8, no. GROUP (2024): 1–33. [https://doi.org/10.1145/3633070.]
[^7]: Robinson, Elizabeth P., and Yizhou Zhu. “Beyond ‘I Agree’: Users’ Understanding of Web Site Terms of Service.” Social Media + Society 6, no. 1 (2020). [https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305119897321.]
[^8]: Moore, Christopher, and Lian Chuang. “Redditors Revealed: Motivational Factors of the Reddit Community.” In Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2017. [https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu/server/api/core/bitstreams/c29d8dbc-aff6-4cc7-8d29-001930a8d03d/content.]
[^9]: Miller, Ryan A. “‘My Voice Is Definitely Strongest in Online Communities’: Students Using Social Media for Queer and Disability Identity-Making.” Journal of College Student Development 58, no. 4 (2017): 509–525. [https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2017.0040.]
